CFGDEGREE Software Assessment -1/06/2023

Theory Questions

1.1 The deque module is part of which python library? 
The Doubly Ended queue is part of the collections library

1.2 What are 2 differences that distinguish a tree from a graph? 
A graph may contain cycles but a tree cannot
A graph may have directions but a tree cannot


1.3 Give the definitions of time complexity and space complexity.
Time complexity is a measure of how fast an algorithm runs as a function of the input size.
Space complexity is a measure of how much auxiliary memory an algorithm takes up as a function of the input size. So this tells us, as you increase the input size, whether the time taken or the space used up will increase linearly, exponentially etc.
It is expressed using Big O notation.


1.4 Describe the bubble sort algorithm and its complexity. What is guaranteed at the end of the first pass? 
The bubble sort algorithm is a sorting algorithm that where it begins by comparing the first two adjacent elements, and swaps them if they are in the wrong order, and then moves on to do the same comparison with the next two values in the list. One cycle is completed once it reaches the end go the list. If n is the number of items in the list then n-1 number of comparisons are required for each cycle. It should then start again for the second cycle. The search stops after a cycle is completed and no swaps were required. Best case scenario is of the list is already ordered so the complexity would be O(n) and worst case scenario is if the list was in reverse order so the complexity would be O(n^2).

1.5 Explain what LIFO and FIFO are and how each works in practice with a named data structure 
LIFO stands for last in first out, meaning that (like a stack of books) the most recently added item is the first to be removed. Stack is a data structure that follows the LIFO principle. So the last item pushed is the first item to be popped off. It is commonly used in function calls and backtracking algorithms.
FIFO stands for first in first out, meaning that (like a queue of people in a line) the oldest/first added item is the first to be removed. Queue is a data structure that follows the FIFO principle. Like push and pop for LIFO, the main operations for this data structure is called enqueue and dequeue. When an item is enqueued it is added to the end of the list and when it is dequeued, the first item from the list is removed. This would be useful for task scheduling and handling requests in computer systems.


1.6 What is a Balanced Binary Tree and what would be the best root? Walkthrough how you search using this structure. 
A balanced binary tree is when the left and right subtree of any node differ by 1 at most.
Start at the root node.
Compare the target value with the value of the selected node 
If the target value matches the selected node's value, the search is successful.
If the target value is smaller, move to the left subtree and repeat the process from step 2 with the left child node.
If the target value is larger, move to the right subtree and repeat the process from step 2 with the right child node.
Repeat steps 2-5 until the target value is found or you reach a leaf node.
If the target value is not found after reaching a leaf node, the search is unsuccessful.
